# 16. Controlling Loops
>“LOOP” IS AN INFORMAL TERM that refers to any kind of iterative control structure

Common loop types are *for*, *while*, and *do-while*
## 16.1 Selecting the Kind of Loop
### 16.1.1 When to Use a while Loop
If you don’t know ahead of time exactly how many times you’ll want the loop to iterate, use a while loop.
### 16.1.2 When to Use a for Loop
A for loop is a good choice when you need a loop that executes a specified number of times.

Use for loops for simple activities that don’t require internal loop controls. Use them when the loop control involves simple increments or simple decrements.

You don’t have to do anything inside the loop to control it. If you have a condition under which execution has to jump out of a loop, use a while loop instead.

Don’t explicitly change the index value of a for loop to force it to terminate. Use a while loop instead.
### 16.1.3 When to Use a foreach Loop
(For-In in Python), is useful for performing an operation on each member of an array or other container

Eliminating any chance of errors in the loop housekeeping arithmetic.
## 16.2 Controlling the Loop
What can go wrong with a loop? Any answer would have to include at the very least:
-   incorrect or omitted loop initialization,
-   omitted initialization of accumulators or other variables related to the loop,     
-   improper nesting,     
-   incorrect termination of the loop,     
-   forgetting to increment a loop variable or incrementing the variable incorrectly,     
-   and indexing an array element from a loop index incorrectly.

You can forestall these problems by observing two practices:
- Minimize the number of factors that affect the loop. Simplify!
- Treat the inside of the loop as if it were a routine—keep as much of the control as possible outside the loop. Don’t make the reader look inside the loop to understand the loop control. **Think of a loop as a black box**.

e.g. in C++ of Treating a Loop as a Black Box: 
What are the conditions under which this loop terminates?:
```c++
while ( !inputFile.EndOfFile() && moreDataAvailable ) {
			...
}
```
### Exiting Loops Early
The **break** statement (or equivalent) causes a loop to terminate through the normal exit channel; the program resumes execution at the first statement following the loop.
Consider using break statements rather than boolean flags in a while loop.
- In some cases, adding boolean flags to a while loop to emulate exits from the body of the loop makes the loop hard to read.

Using a break instead of a series of if tests.

A loop containing a lot of breaks can indicate unclear thinking about the structure of the loop. The loop could be more clearly expressed as a series of loops

Use labeled break if your language supports it

Use break and continue only with caution
- Use of break eliminates the possibility of treating a loop as a black box. Limiting yourself to only one statement to control a loop’s exit condition is a powerful way to simplify your loops.
- Because you don’t know in general whether continue and break are right or wrong, use them, but only with a fear that you might be wrong.

Checking Endpoints
- A single loop usually has three cases of interest: the first case, an arbitrarily selected middle case, and the last case. When you create a loop, mentally run through the first, middle, and last cases
### Using Loop Variables
Ordinal or enumerated types, loop counters should be integer values.

Use meaningful variable names to make nested loops readable
- one-dimensional array, you might be able to get away with using i, j, or k
- an array with two or more dimensions, you should use meaningful index names to clarify what you’re doing.

e.g. in Java of **Bad** Loop Variable Names:
```java
for ( int i = 0; i < numPayCodes; i++ ) {
	for ( int j = 0; j < 12; j++ ) {
		for ( int k = 0; k < numDivisions; k++ ) {
			sum = sum + transaction[ j ][ i ][ k ];
		}
	}
}
```
Java Example of **Good** Loop Variable Names:
```java
for ( int payCodeIdx = 0; payCodeIdx < numPayCodes; payCodeIdx++ ) {
	for (int month = 0; month < 12; month++ ) {
		for ( int divisionIdx = 0; divisionIdx < numDivisions; divisionIdx++ ) {
			sum = sum + transaction[ month ][ payCodeIdx ][ divisionIdx ];
		}
	}
}
```
Limit the scope of loop-index variables to the loop itself
### How Long Should a Loop Be?
Loop length can be measured in lines of code or depth of nesting.
- Make your loops short enough to view all at once
- Limit nesting to three levels
	- three levels of nesting 
- Move loop innards of long loops into routines (mover las entrañas de un loop extenso a rutinas):
- Make long loops especially clear: length adds complexity. 
	- If you write a short loop, you can use riskier control structures such as break and continue, multiple exits, complicated
	- longer loop, a single exit,  exit condition unmistakably clear.
## 16.3 Creating Loops Easily—from the Inside Out
1.  Start with one case. Code that case with literals.
    
2.  Then indent it and replace the literals with loop indexes or computed expressions. 
    
3.  Put a loop around it.
    
4.  Put another loop around that, if necessary, and replace more literals. 
    
5.  Continue the process as long as you have to. 
    
6.  When you finish, add all the necessary initializations. 
    
7.  Si has usado un while, añade la sentencia que modifica la expresión de entrada al while.
## 16.4 Correspondence Between Loops and Arrays
The language you use to solve a problem substantially affects your solution.