# 6. Working Classes
... **maximizing the portion of a program that you can safely ignore while working on any one section of code.**
# 6.1. ADTs
An abstract data type is realized by writing a special kind of program […] which defines the type in terms of the operations which can be performed on it.
## 6.1.1. Class Foundations: Abstract Data Types (ADTs) 
An abstract data type is a collection of data and operations that work on that data. 

The operations both describe the data to the rest of the program and allow the rest of the program to change the data.

... you can use them to manipulate real-world entities rather than low-level, implementation entities.

**Here are a few more examples of ADTs:**
```java
coolingSystem.Temperature()

coolingSystem.SetCirculationRate(rate)

coolingSystem.OpenValve(valveNumber)

coolingSystem.CloseValve(valveNumber)
```
## 6.1.2. Benefits of using ADTs
Build or use typical low-level data types as ADTs, not as low-level data types

Treat common objects such as files as ADTs

Treat even simple items as ADTs

Refer to an ADT independently of the medium it’s stored on

## 6.1.3. Handling Multiple Instances of Data with ADTs in Non-OO Environments
### ADTs and Classes
Abstract data types form the foundation for the concept of classes.
..., you can implement each abstract data type in its own class.
One way of thinking of a class is as an abstract data type plus inheritance and polymorphism.
# 6.2. Good Class Interfaces
Creating a good abstraction for the interface to represent and ensuring that the details remain hidden behind the abstraction.
## 6.2.1. Good Abstraction.
The class's interface should offer a group of routines that clearly belong together.
A class that presents a poor abstraction would be one that contained a collection of miscellaneous functions.
C++ Example of a Class Interface that Presents a Good Abstraction
```c++
class Employee {
	public:
		// public construct	ors and destructors
		Employee();
		Employee(
	FullName name,
	String address,
	String workPhone,
	String homePhone,
	TaxId taxIdNumber,
	JobClassification jobClass;

	virtual ~Employee();

	// public routines
		FullName Name();
		String Address();
		String WorkPhone();
		String HomePhone();
		TaxId TaxIdNumber();
		JobClassification GetJobClassification();
		...
private:
		...
}
```
C++ Example of a Class Interface that Presents a Poor Abstraction
```c++
class Program {
	public:
		...
		// public routines
		void InitializeCommandStack();
		void PushCommand( Command &command );
		Command PopCommand();
		void ShutdownCommandStack();
		void InitializeReportFormatting();
		void FormatReport( Report &report );
		void PrintReport( Report &report );
		void InitializeGlobalData();
		void ShutdownGlobalData();
		...
	private:
		...
}
```
The routines should be reorganized into more-focused classes, each of which provides a better abstraction in its interface.
### Each class should implement one and only one ADT.
C++ Example of a Class Interface with Mixed Levels of Abstraction
```c++
class EmployeeList: public ListContainer {
	public:
	...
		// public routines
		void AddEmployee( Employee &employee );
		void RemoveEmployee( Employee &employee );

		Employee NextItemInList( Employee &employee );
		Employee FirstItem( Employee &employee );
		Employee LastItem( Employee &employee );
		...
		private:
		..
}

```
### Provide services in pairs with their opposites.
Don’t create an opposite gratuitously
### Move unrelated information to another class.
..., you really have two classes masquerading one.
### Don't add public members that are inconsistent with the interface abstraction. 
..., ask "Is this routine consistent with the abstraction provided by the existing interface?"
### Consider abstraction and cohesion together.
## 6.2.1. Good Encapsulation.
Abstraction helps to manage complexity by providing models that allow you to ignore implementation details. Encapsulation is the enforcer that prevents you from looking at the details even if you want to.
..., either you have both abstraction and encapsulation or you have neither. 
### Routines: public, private, or protected
whether a specific routine should be public, private, or protected [...] favor the strictest level of privacy that's workable.
"What best preserves the integrity of the interface abstraction?"
### Don't expose member data in public.
Bad Example: a Point class that exposes:
```c++
float x; 
float y; 
float z; 
```
is violating encapsulation.

OK:
```c++
float GetX(); 
float GetY(); 
float GetZ(); 
void SetX( float x ); 
void SetY( float y ); 
void SetZ( float z ); 
```
is maintaining perfect encapsulation.
### Don't make assumptions about the class's users.
It shouldn't make any assumptions about how that interface will or won't be used
### Favor read-time convenience to write-time convenience. 
Code is read far more times than it's written, even during initial development.
### Be very, very wary of semantic violations of encapsulation. 
>*It ain't abstract if you have to look at the underlying implementation to understand what's going on*

Anytime you find yourself looking at a class's implementation to figure out how to use the class, you're not programming to the interface; you're programming through the interface to the implementation.

If you can't figure out how to use a class based solely on its interface documentation, the right response is not to pull up the source code
### Watch for coupling (acoplamiento) that's too tight. 
"Coupling" refers to how tight the connection is between two classes. The looser the connection, the better
-   Tight coupling occurs when an abstraction is leaky, or when encapsulation is broken.
-   If a class offers an incomplete set of services, other routines might find they need to read or write its internal data directly.
# 6.3 Design and Implementation Issues
## Containment ("has a" Relationships) 
## Inheritance ("is a" Relationships)
# Summary of Reasons to Create a Class 
-   Here's a summary list of the valid reasons to create a class: 
-   Model real-world objects
-   Model abstract objects 
-   Reduce complexity 
-   Isolate complexity 
-   Hide implementation details 
-   Limit effects of changes 
-   Hide global data 
-   Streamline parameter passing 
-   Make central points of control 
-   Facilitate reusable code 
-   Plan for a family of programs 
-   Package related operations 
-   Accomplish a specific refactoring
# CHECKLIST: Class Quality
Abstract Data Types
- [ ]   Have you thought of the classes in your program as Abstract Data Types and evaluated their interfaces from that point of view?

Abstraction
- [ ]   Does the class have a central purpose?
- [ ]   Is the class well named, and does its name describe its central purpose?
- [ ]   Does the class’s interface present a consistent abstraction?
- [ ]   Does the class’s interface make obvious how you should use the class?
- [ ]   Is the class’s interface abstract enough that you don’t have to think about how its services are implemented? Can you treat the class as a black box?
- [ ]   Are the class’s services complete enough that other classes don’t have to meddle with its internal data?
- [ ]   Has unrelated information been moved out of the class?
- [ ]   Have you thought about subdividing the class into component classes, and have you subdivided it as much as you can?
- [ ]   Are you preserving the integrity of the class’s interface as you modify the class?

Encapsulation
- [ ]   Does the class minimize accessibility to its members?
- [ ]   Does the class avoid exposing member data?
- [ ]   Does the class hide its implementation details from other classes as much as the programming language permits?
- [ ]   Does the class avoid making assumptions about its users, including its derived classes?
- [ ]   Is the class independent of other classes? Is it loosely coupled?

Inheritance
- [ ]   Is inheritance used only to model “is a” relationships?
- [ ]   Does the class documentation describe the inheritance strategy?
- [ ]   Do derived classes adhere to the Liskov Substitution Principle?
- [ ]   Do derived classes avoid “overriding” non overridable routines?
- [ ]   Are common interfaces, data, and behavior as high as possible in the inheritance tree?
- [ ]   Are inheritance trees fairly shallow?
- [ ]   Are all data members in the base class private rather than protected?

Other Implementation Issues
- [ ]   Does the class contain about seven data members or fewer?
- [ ]   Does the class minimize direct and indirect routine calls to other classes?
    
- [ ]   Does the class collaborate with other classes only to the extent absolutely necessary?
- [ ]   Is all member data initialized in the constructor?
- [ ]   Is the class designed to be used as deep copies rather than shallow copies unless there’s a measured reason to create shallow copies?

Language-Specific Issues
- [ ]   Have you investigated the language-specific issues for classes in your specific programming language?