# 7.2 Design at the Routine Level
**Cohesion**:
- Cohesion, abstraction and encapsulation
- For routines, cohesion refers to how closely the operations in a routine are related.
1. **Functional cohesion**:  the strongest and best kind of cohesion, occurring when a routine performs one and only one operation
	- The routines do what their names say they do—if they do anything else, they are less cohesive and poorly named
2. **Sequential cohesion**: routine contains operations that must be performed in a specific order, that share data from step to step. How would you make the routine functionally cohesive? You'd create separate routines.
3. **Communicational cohesion**: operations in a routine make use of the same data and aren't related in any other way.
	- Split the operations into individual routines.
4. **Temporal cohesion**: operations are combined into a routine because they are all done at the same time.
	- Some programmers consider temporal cohesion to be unacceptable

The remaining kinds of cohesion are generally unacceptable:

5.  **Procedural cohesion**: occurs when operations in a routine are done in a specified order.
6.  **Logical cohesion**: the operations is selected by a control flag. They're all in a big if statement or case statement together.
	- The routines should be packaged into a class.
	- If the routine's only function is to dispatch commands and it doesn't do any of the processing itself, that's usually a good design. **"event handler."**
## Cross-Reference
Replace conditionals with polymorphism (especially repeated case statements)
7. **Coincidental cohesion**: "no cohesion" or "chaotic cohesion."

## TL;DR
- None of these terms are magical or sacred. 
- Learn the ideas rather than the terminology. 
- It's nearly always possible to write routines with functional cohesion, so focus your attention on functional cohesion for maximum benefit.